=head1 NAME

tkifm -- simple graphical front end to ifm(1)

=head1 SYNOPSIS

tkifm [file]

=begin inf

tkifm -- graphical interface to IFM
***********************************

This Info file describes tkifm, a simple front end to the Interactive
Fiction Mapper (*note IFM:(ifm).)

=end inf

=for inf node DESCRIPTION, Introduction, What is tkifm?
=for inf node USING YOUR OWN EDITOR, Editors, Using your own editor
=for inf node CUSTOMIZATION, Customization, Customizing tkifm operation
=for inf node ERRORS AND WARNINGS, Diagnostics, Errors and Warnings

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<tkifm> is a graphical front end to B<IFM>, the Interactive Fiction
Mapper.  It provides a text editing window in which you map out your game
using B<IFM> commands, and a set of menus to view things.  The various
features are as follows:

=over 4

=item Text editing window

This is the main window, where you type B<IFM> commands.  It provides all
the usual text editing command bindings that come with the Tcl/Tk text
widget.

=item File menu

The standard set of file commands: New, Open, Save, Save-As, Print (to
PostScript), Quit.  There's also a command called Redraw, which invokes
B<IFM> on the current file again.  Normally you don't have to use this
(it's done whenever you open a new file or save the current one), but if
you change your initialisation file (see below) the changes won't be
noticed unless you do a Redraw.

=item Map menu

For each map section in your map, a menu entry appears here.  Selecting it
will draw the appropriate map in another window.

=item Item menu

This contains a single menu item, which displays a list of items in another
window.

=item Task menu

This contains a single menu item, which displays a high-level walkthrough
of the game in another window.

=item Debugging output menu

This contains a single menu item, which displays some debugging information
in another window.

=item Help menu

At the moment this just displays a small info panel about the current
B<IFM> version.

=back

=head1 USING YOUR OWN EDITOR

If you'd like to use your own editor to edit B<IFM> files, but still view
results with B<tkifm>, you can.  B<tkifm> recognizes when the file it is
visiting gets modified, and rereads it if so.  If you like, you can also
disable all B<tkifm> file modification commands by setting the C<ifm(edit)>
variable to zero (see L<"CUSTOMIZATION">).

=head1 CUSTOMIZATION

On startup, B<tkifm> reads an initialisation file in your home directory
(the one pointed at by the B<HOME> environment variable).  On Unix systems
it is called F<.tkifmrc>, and on Win32 systems it is called F<tkifm.ini>.
From there, using Tcl commands, you can set various things that affect the
appearance of the program.  Here's an example file showing the valid
variables, their format and defaults.

    # Example tkifm init file.

    # Whether to allow editing.
    set ifm(edit) 1

    # Edit window dimensions.
    set ifm(editwidth) 80
    set ifm(editheight) 24

    # Editing font.
    set ifm(editfont) {Courier 12 bold}

    # Edit window colours.
    set ifm(editforeground) black
    set ifm(editbackground) wheat

    # Item list window dimensions.
    set ifm(itemwidth) 50
    set ifm(itemheight) 30

    # Task list window dimensions.
    set ifm(taskwidth) 50
    set ifm(taskheight) 30

    # Debugging output window dimensions.
    set ifm(debugwidth) 80
    set ifm(debugheight) 30

    # Text window font.
    set ifm(textfont) {Times 12 bold}

    # Text window colours.
    set ifm(textforeground) black
    set ifm(textbackground) wheat

    # Whether to allow tearoff menus.
    set ifm(tearoff) 1

=head1 ERRORS AND WARNINGS

Any errors or warnings that occur when invoking B<IFM> will be displayed in
a dialog.  The current line of the text window will be changed to point at
the error or warning line (if appropriate).

=for inf skipnode

=head1 SEE ALSO

ifm(1)

=for inf skipnode

=head1 AUTHOR

Glen Hutchings

=cut
