=head1 OPERATION

On startup, B<IFM> does the following.  Firstly, if there is a system
initialization file for this system, and it exists, it is read.  This sets
defaults used by everyone.  This file is called F<ifm-init.ifm>, and is
found by searching a standard set of directories.  You can override this
search path by setting the environment variable B<IFMPATH> to be a
colon-separated list of directories.

Then, if you have a personal initialization file, that is read.  This file
is found in the directory specified by your B<HOME> environment variable.
On Unix systems, it is called F<.ifmrc>, and on Win32 systems it is called
F<ifm.ini>.  You can use this file to customize the default variable
settings for different types of output.

Then input from the file on the command-line is read.  If no file was
specified, B<stdin> is read.  If any of the B<-map>, B<-items> or B<-tasks>
options was specified, the appropriate output is produced.  If not, only a
syntax check of the input is done.

When producing output, the output format specified by the B<-format> option
is used.  If this was not specified, then the value of the variable called
B<format> is used.  If that hasn't been set, the first format in the list
which supports this type of output is chosen.

Some of the output formats use additional library files to do their work.
For example, the PostScript output format adds a standard "prolog" file to
all output.  These files are found using the same search path as the system
initialization file (see above).

Here's a list of the command-line options:

=over 4

=item B<-m>, B<-map>

Draw a map of the game.

=item B<-i>, B<-items>

Print a list of items which appear in the game.

=item B<-t>, B<-tasks>

Print a list of tasks required to solve the game.

=item B<-f>, B<-format> format

Specify the output format (see L<"OUTPUT FORMATS">).

=item B<-o>, B<-output> F<file>

Write to the specified file, instead of stdout.

=item B<-w>, B<-nowarn>

Don't print warnings.

=item B<-d>, B<-debug>

Print debugging information.

=item B<-noinit>

Don't read your personal init file.

=item B<-nosysinit>

Don't read the system init file.

=item B<-showpath>

Show the directories that are searched for library and include files.

=item B<-v>, B<-version>

Print the program version.

=item B<-help>

Print a usage message, including the available output formats.

=back
