=head1 DIAGNOSTICS

This section describes the possible error and warning messages which might
be produced by B<IFM>, and what they mean.  Note that individual output
formats may print their own errors and/or warnings.  This list only covers
the standard ones.

Here's the list of error messages.  If any errors occur, no output is
produced.

=over 4

=item B<error: invalid repeat count>

You've given a repeat count of zero or less for a string or direction,
which doesn't make much sense.

=item B<error: no last room>

You've given the very first room a 'dir' clause.  See L<"Rooms">.

=item B<error: no [type] referred to by 'last'>

You've said 'last' to refer to the last room, item or task that was
defined, but none of that type of object have been defined yet.  See
L<"Tags">.

=item B<error: no [type] referred to by 'it'>

You've said 'it' to refer to the last room, item or task tag that was
mentioned in the current command, but no tags of that type of object have
been mentioned.  See L<"Tags">.

=item B<error: [type] tag [name] already defined>

You've given two similar objects the same tag name.  See L<"Tags">.

=item B<error: [type] tag [name] not defined>

You've referred to a tag name that hasn't been defined anywhere in the
input.  See L<"Tags">.

=item B<error: [type] tag [name] not yet defined>

You're referring to a tag at a point where it hasn't yet been defined, in a
situation where it must be (e.g. the room 'from' clause, or a command that
modifies attributes of a previously-defined object).  See L<"Tags">.

=item B<error: can't modify [name] attribute>

You're attempting to modify an attribute of an object which can't be
changed once it's set (e.g. a tag name).  This is because it would create
inconsistencies between objects.

=item B<error: can't link [name1] and [name2] -- different map sections>

The rooms you're trying to link are on different sections of the map, and
have no spatial relation to one another.  You might have forgotten to link
a previous room in the list.  Or you meant to use a 'join'.

=item B<error: can't link [name] to itself without at least one direction>

To link a room to itself, you need to specify at least one direction.
Otherwise, the link goes nowhere.  See L<"Links">.

=item B<error: links between [name1] and [name2] have differing lengths>

You've defined more than one link or join between the given rooms, but
given them different values for the 'length' attribute.  This isn't
allowed.  See L<"Limitations">.

=item B<error: more than one task needs to follow [task] immediately>

You've given two or more tasks an identical 'follow' tag.  Only one task
can 'follow' a given task.  See L<"Tasks">.

=item B<error: [num] cyclic task dependencies>

The game isn't solvable because there's one or more chains of tasks where
each must be done before the next, but the last must be done before the
first.  See L<"Finding a Solution">.

=item B<error: [type] variable [name] is not defined>

A customization variable needed by an output format is not defined.  You
should only see these errors if you have modified or overridden the system
initialization file.  The remedy is to define the variable somewhere.

=back

Here's the list of warning messages.  If only warnings occur, then output
is still produced.

=over 4

=item B<warning: attribute [attr] ignored -- no implicit link>

You've given a room with no 'dir' clause an attribute that is associated
with that link (e.g. 'oneway', or 'special').  Most likely you're putting
the attribute in the wrong place -- if you want, say, a join to have one of
these attributes, you must define it using the standalone 'join' command
instead.  See L<"Rooms">.

=item B<warning: link from [name1] to [name2] outside grid>

The destination room for a link is not in a compass direction from the last
specified position.

=item B<warning: rooms [name1] and [name2] overlap>

The coordinates of the specified rooms are the same.  See L<"Conflicts">.

=item B<warning: room [name] crossed by link line between [name] and [name]>

A link line passes through the coordinates of a room.  See L<"Conflicts">.

=item B<warning: can't solve game ([num] tasks not done)>

The game is unsolvable according to the current set of tasks.  This can be
due to part of the map being inaccessible, or B<IFM> stupidly choosing the
wrong order of doing things.  Hopefully the latter shouldn't happen very
often.  See L<"Finding a Solution">.

=item B<warning: [keyword] is obsolete -- use [phrase] instead>

You've used an obsolete keyword.  Consult the documentation and then try
the suggested alternative instead.  Note that multiple uses of an obsolete
keyword only result in a single warning.

=back
